Differences Between HTTP and HTTPS
HTTP (HyperText Transfer Protocol) and HTTPS (HyperText Transfer Protocol Secure) are both protocols used for transferring data over the web, but they have key differences, primarily related to security:

Security:

HTTP: Data is sent in plain text, making it vulnerable to interception and eavesdropping. Anyone intercepting the traffic can read the contents of the communication.
HTTPS: Data is encrypted using SSL/TLS (Secure Sockets Layer/Transport Layer Security), making the data unintelligible to eavesdroppers. This protects the integrity and confidentiality of the data.
Use of Certificates:

HTTP: Does not use certificates.
HTTPS: Uses SSL/TLS certificates issued by Certificate Authorities (CAs) to authenticate the server and establish a secure connection.
Port Numbers:

HTTP: Typically uses port 80.
HTTPS: Typically uses port 443.
SEO and Trust:

HTTP: Less trusted by users, and some browsers may mark HTTP sites as "Not Secure".
HTTPS: Preferred by search engines for ranking, and provides a secure indication to users, often displayed as a padlock icon in the browser's address bar.
Structure of an HTTP Request and Response
HTTP Request Structure
An HTTP request consists of several parts:

Request Line: Contains the method (e.g., GET, POST), the path to the resource, and the HTTP version.

GET /index.html HTTP/1.1

Headers: Provide additional information about the request. Each header is a key-value pair.

Host: www.example.com
User-Agent: Mozilla/5.0
Accept: text/html


Body: Optional, used in methods like POST to send data to the server.
HTTP Response Structure
An HTTP response consists of:

Status Line: Contains the HTTP version, status code, and status message.

HTTP/1.1 200 OK

Headers: Provide additional information about the response
Content-Type: text/html
Content-Length: 1234

Body: Contains the requested resource (e.g., HTML content).
Common HTTP Methods
GET: Retrieves data from the server.
Use case: Fetching a web page or reading data from an API.
POST: Submits data to the server.
Use case: Submitting a form or uploading a file.
PUT: Updates existing data on the server.
Use case: Updating user information in a database.
DELETE: Deletes data from the server.
Use case: Removing a resource or user account.

Common HTTP Status Codes
200 OK:

Description: The request was successful, and the server returned the requested resource.
Scenario: Successfully fetching a web page.
301 Moved Permanently:

Description: The requested resource has been permanently moved to a new URL.
Scenario: Redirecting from an old URL to a new URL.
404 Not Found:

Description: The server could not find the requested resource.
Scenario: Trying to access a non-existent page.
500 Internal Server Error:

Description: The server encountered an error and could not complete the request.
Scenario: A script on the server fails due to a programming error.
403 Forbidden:

Description: The server understood the request but refuses to authorize it.
Scenario: Trying to access a restricted resource without proper permissions.
By observing HTTP and HTTPS traffic using tools like Wireshark, you can see these differences in action, 
with HTTP traffic appearing in plain text and HTTPS traffic appearing encrypted. Inspecting network
 requests in a browser's developer tools allows you to see the structure of HTTP requests and responses
firsthand.

